                         aForth for RISC OS v0.78
                         ˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜

                      by Reuben Thomas (rrt@sc3d.org)


aForth is a simple Forth compiler for Acorn RISC OS. It evolved from an
earlier system which was originally based on Forth-83, then modified to
conform to the ANSI standard. It was changed in an attempt to make it
portable, and suitable for study as a model implementation, but did not meet
either criterion terribly well. It was principally used as an environment for
building other Forth compilers: metacompiling itself for RISC OS and the
Beetle virtual machine; compiling a cut-down version called mForth for RISC
OS and Beetle, and building Machine Forth systems.

aForth (short for Animex Forth, where the "a" should really be an alpha) is
released purely in the hope that it might be interesting or useful to
someone.


Copyright and Disclaimer
˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜

The package is distributed under the GNU Public License version 3, or, at
your option, any later version. A copy is available from my web page (address
above).

THIS PROGRAM IS PROVIDED AS IS, WITH NO WARRANTY. USE IS AT THE USER'S RISK.


Acknowledgements
˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜

Thanks to Hanno Schwalm for improved 0=, U< and U> primitives, and to the
authors of RISC Forth, the first Forth system I studied closely, which
inspired me to write aForth.


References
˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜

Details of Beetle and my Machine Forth implementations are available from my
home page:

http://sc3d.org/rrt/

You're welcome to distribute aForth yourself, but please tell me so I can
inform you of updates.


Bugs and comments
˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜

Please send me bug reports and comments; I will probably fix any bugs. Any
future development is likely to involve a total rewrite; I'm particularly
interested in rewriting aForth in a more Forth-like manner (more decomposed,
rather than implementing each word as a single word), and perhaps using
object orientation. But I'm even more interested in moving away from Forth
altogether, so it may well never happen.
