Support CELL = 8

Have SIGINT handler in interpreter loop, so Ctrl+C first escapes execution,
and only quits if typed in ACCEPT.

Add startup script support using environment variable PFORTH_INIT (needs
getenv), and use this to replace extended image building (works for RISC OS
too!).

Document the compiler relative to the Forth 2012 standard.

Add backtrace to error output.

Support objects.

Support locals.

Add TIMES combinator and use in assembler.

Make pForth case-insensitive for word lookup, or downcase it all.

Add assembler to base image.

Have consistent source copyright notices.

Obviate the need for the compilation method field (>COMPILE) by using
cmForth-like compilation word list. But this does prevent it being possible
to have separate execution and interpretation semantics at compile time. Or,
have a stateless always-compiling compiler, where running out of code to
compile before ; causes the code compiled so far to be executed and thrown
away.


The future of pForth:

All the stuff below still applies if I feel like doing anything to the Forth
system itself. Indeed, it may well provide a good starting point for many of
the Tau structures, though I'll probably want to develop the language first.


Add INLINE name and ( xt ) INLINE, for compiling in-line code.

Have DLITERAL, as the current way of doing double literals is rather
unportable.

Have proper escape and error handlers that throw an exception. Use exceptions
in the file words instead of return codes (have a switch to go between
returning codes and throwing exceptions).

Metacompilation: all defining words should be classes; then during
metacompilation there's two versions of each class, one implemented by the
cross-compiler, and one in the compiled implementation. Using something like
delegation, metacompiled classes can delegate to a class in the metacompiler,
or (much of the time) delegate wholesale to the standard class (when the
structure of the metacompiled class is the same).

Continue to reengineer HighLevel code:

0. OOPify; this takes in all the steps below. Rewrite the metacompiler to use
objects whose methods are different depending on whether we're in the
compiler or metacompiler (this is really contexts).

1. Factor long definitions. Especially, re-engineer code that deals with
input source in a much more OOP manner into one package for each type of
input stream (string, terminal, blocks, files): have an input source object
whose methods (SOURCE-ID, SOURCE, SAVE-INPUT, RESTORE-INPUT &c.) can be called.

2. Break up HighLevel into multiple source files: do it by wordset: then can
build versions of pForth with any specified wordsets, and later wordsets
ought to be able to be loaded on top of older ones. The hard thing will be to
deal with words whose semantics are extended by different wordsets,
especially those whose semantics are extended more than once. pForth's own
words such as the forward refs compiler tools ought to have their own
wordsets.

3. Separate OS from processor, so that e.g. mit and ARM versions of RISC OS
pForth can use the same OS interface and code.

4. Add memory allocation and use for transient buffers. Using for
dictionaries has two obvious problems: first, need to auto-extend areas being
compiled into (or shrink to fit at end); second, generating a meta-compiled
image will be harder.

5. Make general-purpose forward-reference mechanism (using CATCH/THROW around
ordinary INTERPRET, and existing forward resolution mechanism). Needs memory
allocation to be able to start a new definition when half-way through the
current one.

6. Reorganize the mess over wordlists (FOREIGN &c.); there must be a simpler
way of handling metacompilation using a more OOP approach (so that even
different dictionary structures can be accomodated). Wordlists in the search
order should call their method (inherited from their dictionary) for
scanning themselves, and report whether the word found is executable on the
current system or not.

7. Need a mechanism for handling system-specific replacement code; then can
replace bits all the way from a simple VM implementation (Tau?) down to a
highly OS-integrated one which replaces ACCEPT &c. Again, use objects.

8. Don't interpret, always compile (incrementally compile a line, then
execute). This gets rid of STATE and dual-action (compile/interpret) words.
Hopefully (there may be some traps in ANS).